---
layout: post
title: "I'm 17."
date: June 24th, 2014
permalink: /17
categories: essays
---

Woah, I'm 17.

This came faster than expected. Wasn't [2013](http://rmorabia.com/2013) just yesterday?

This past year has been crazy. Here's what I've done with it:

 - I started [rmorabia.com](http://rmorabia.com), which is read by thousands of people every month.
 - I read more life-changing books than most people do in their entire lives.
 - I met amazing people who have challenged me, supported me, and taught me so much.
 - I learned Git, mastered HTML and CSS, and decided to pursue web development.
 - [I built the website you're reading now.](http://rmorabia.com/redesign)
 - I quit high school (more on this in a later post).
 - I decided that I had the potential to change the world.

# Lessons Learned At 16

I also learned a plethora of lessons this year, and I'm grateful to all the sources who taught me these lessons. For the lessons learned in the first six months of being 16, [see this post](http://rmorabia.com/2013). Here are the lessons I learned in the past six months:

## Lesson #1: Look at your issues in hindsight--in the present.

This sounds a little confusing, but it's actually an amazing lesson.

If you look back in your past, at your most despairing moments, chances are, it was a good lesson learned, or it wasn't that big of a deal. Surviving made you stronger, or at a minimum, it had no real effect, even if it took you years to realize it.

The key now is to identify these moments in the present, and try to figure out what your future self will say about the situation.

For example, say you get crazy lost on your way to your friend's birthday party. Usually, people are cursing, going "Agh! I'm late, I'm late!" Here's what you would think: "Hey, when I reach, this would make a good story."

You'll calm down, appreciate the moment more, and get a lot less hurt in the process.

## Lesson #2: Challenges are a blessing.

Nothing is an impediment or impossible--everything is a challenge.

You are blessed to have this challenge, because then you have the opportunity to overcome it and become a stronger human being.

I used to envy the people with their lives set in front of them. The most adversity they'd ever experienced was self-made. And here I was, struggling with school, dealing with more pain than I ever knew was possible, and going through an existential crisis.

Within 2 years of all of this occurring, I feel like I've surpassed these people without adversity at least 10x.

Now, I won't seek out adversity, but whenever it crosses my path (which, thankfully, is pretty often), the first thing I do is ask myself, "How can I use this to my advantage?"

The answer to this can be as simple as, "This adversity is telling me that this isn't the right path," or it could bring up some deeper issues, like insecurity, and allow me to focus on the real problem and not just the symptoms.

For more on this, see Ryan Holiday's latest book, [*The Obstacle is the Way*](http://www.amazon.com/The-Obstacle-Is-Way-Timeless/dp/1591846358).

## Lesson #3: Be selfish.

If you want to help other people, you have to help yourself first. You have to be the best person you can be in order to make the biggest impact on the world.

If you focus entirely on helping every single person you meet, you'll be broke and exhausted within a week. Instead, you have to pick your battles carefully, and make sure you're properly equipped to win those battles.

Focus on your own health, well-being, and progress. When you're at your peak, you can do so much more for the world than you could if you gave yourself entirely to the cause.

This is why, on airplanes, when you put on the oxygen masks, they ask you to put one on yourself before assisting others. If you don't focus on yourself first, you'll just fall with the others, instead of allowing you all to rise together.

## Lesson #4: You don't need permission from anyone.

You can do whatever you want and you don't have to ask anyone for permission. Everything you think you need permission for is a societal construct.

Hopefully, you take this in a positive way, and realize that you can become exactly like the people you read about and see on TV. You can be anything you want to be, and no one can stop you.

So, do you want to rule the world? Go ahead. Do you want to become a master historian? Do it. Do you want to go into outer space? [Yeah.](http://www.spacex.com/)

For more on this, see James Altucher's book, [*Choose Yourself*](http://www.amazon.com/Choose-Yourself-James-Altucher/dp/1490313370/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1371758078&sr=8-1).

## Lesson #5: [We're all mortal.](http://rmorabia.com/mortal)

The people you admire are all mortal, just like you. Your idols struggle with the little things, just like you. They get food poisoning and sometimes they let out gas in awkward situations, too. It is possible that they have some genetic advantage over you which would never enable you to become exactly like them, but at the same time, you have your own advantages, too! No one has your exact make-up, experiences, and potential.

You can be as great as your idols, if not better--only if you really want to be.

Look, you only have one chance. Even if you believe in reincarnation, it's not like you get to continue right where you left off.

You can be as great as anyone you admire. Do you want to create a massive empire like Steve Jobs? Go ahead. Do you want to innovate as much as Elon Musk? Sure. Do you want to be as culturally significant as Beyonce? Why not?

[What's stopping you?](http://rmorabia.com/deserve)

For more on this, pick up an unbiased biography of your favorite historical figure.

## Lesson #6: You already have everything you need.

Alexander the Great was extraordinary. At 20, he took over the Macedonian throne and expanded it from Greece all the way south to Egypt, and all the way east to India.

What did he have that I don't? He was tutored by Aristotle. Big deal. I have access to Aristotle's works, along with his teacher Plato's work, and Plato's teacher Socrates' work. I'm so blessed, because I can get this all for free by going to my local library and reading using [Project Gutenberg](http://gutenberg.org).

Since you're probably reading this using the internet, too, you have more potential than Alexander the Great, as well. Sure, he was given a throne to take over by birthright, but no one's stopping you from ruling the world. Adolf Hitler, only armed with his charisma, nearly did this--and he didn't even have the internet!

You can connect with anyone you want, you can learn anything you want, and you can do anything you want--for free or for an inconsequential price (eg. buying a domain to begin publishing your art to the web, which will pay itself back 10x once your art sells).

The only thing stopping you is your own lack of effort.

## Lesson #7: Find idols and in-betweeners, and make them all your mentors.

Idols are people who you aspire to be. You may not want to be exactly like them, but there's at least a few traits that you definitely want. Idols have reached a place which is too far away from where you are. Emulating them probably won't work. (eg. Investing like Warren Buffet when you just started investing last week won't work.)

In-betweeners are people who are only a little bit ahead of you on the path. You know they're going to be pretty amazing down the line, but they're still in an approachable place. You may be able to contact them and get personal help from them, and emulating the good parts will definitely help you.

It's definitely possible for one person to be both things for you. In the age of blogs, you may be able to access your idols' personal thoughts and advice long before they blew up. If your idol is old enough to have biographies, they can be an in-betweener if you focus on their formative years.

How do you make them your mentors? It's simple. Consume everything you can about them, and extract as many lessons as you can. This can occur through interviews, their own published works, and published works about them.

If they're still alive, do everything you can to get inside access. Being able to work under your mentor and see them in action is infinitely more valuable than just extracting lessons from edited works. If you get on their radar and offer value, you may also be able to get personalized advice and direction, which will probably be life-changing.

Doing this will put you years ahead of your peers. Mentors and apprenticeships are the fastest way to get to where you wnt to go.

For more on this, see Ryan Holiday's article, [How to Find Mentors](http://thoughtcatalog.com/ryan-holiday/2013/08/how-to-find-mentors/).

## Lesson #8: Don't be afraid to reach out to people.

[According to the Radicati Group](http://www.radicati.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Email-Statistics-Report-2014-2018-Executive-Summary.pdf), there are over 4.1 billion email addresses. You can email virtually anyone in the world.

You have free access to a ton of really interesting people that you can possibly learn from. All you need is an email address, access to the internet, and 15 minutes to compose a nice, human email.

The person you're trying to email might not reply, or might not be willing to talk further. That's fine. All you lost was a little bit of time. Remember, though, if you keep at it consistently, you'll meet some absolutely extraordinary people, and they can help you in unimaginable ways.

[Seth Godin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seth_Godin), author of 18 best-selling books and founder of Squidoo, answered my email. I sent a quick question about ebooks, and he replied within 24 hours. How extraordinary is that?

[Sebastian Marshall](http://sebastianmarshall.com), the greatest strategist of our era, [answers email for entertainment](http://www.sebastianmarshall.com/90-9-1). I've emailed Sebastian multiple times, and have gotten life-changing advice from it.

You have nothing to lose.

In order to maximize response, make it as easy as possible for the person you're reaching out to respond. Since I usually email someone after reading something they wrote, here's my general template:

>Hey [*Name*],
>
>My name is Radhika Morabia, and I read your piece, [*Name of Piece*]. I was curious about [*Topic Covered in Piece*] and have some follow-up questions:
>
>1. [*Question*]
>
>2. [*Question*]
>
>3. [*Question*]
>
>Looking forward to your response!
>
>Radhika Morabia

The key is simply to be human and show that you're actually interested in hearing about what they have to say. From this, you may just get a single response that answers your questions, but you can also have a back-and-forth exchange that will definitely get you on this person's radar. This person can eventually be a business partner, a mentor, or even a good friend.

If you have no one in mind, [start with me!](mailto:hi@rmorabia.com) I love getting email.

For more on this, see Sebastian Marshall's article, [The Three Basic Ways to Connect With More People](http://sebastianmarshall.com/the-three-basic-ways-to-connect-with-more-people).

## Lesson #9: Consistency wins.

Humans are weird. When we have a new goal or project, the motivation is high and we tend to work super hard for the first day or week.

We make major strides during this first week, and then we burn out. The project's left at at a 20% completion, and will probably stay there until we pick this project back up next year, if we ever do.

I have a better prescription.

During the first week when your motivation is high, slow down. Make small steps every day instead of pushing and pushing until you burn out. Instead of focusing on doing the most you can in the beginning, use your extra motivation to set yourself up to make small steps every day. Build systems (eg. setting out your athletic clothes the night before, so that when you're groggy in the morning, you have a trigger to go to the gym). Ensure that you won't give up.

A month from now, you'll be able to look in hindsight and go, "Wow! Look at how much I accomplished!" unlike the usual, "That didn't go as planned..."

For more on this, see [What do you Deserve?](http://rmorabia.com/deserve)

## Lesson #10: Don't be afraid to quit.

Earlier this year, I took on a 30-day writing challenge.

The goal was simple--publish a post on rmorabia.com every day for 30 days. I failed--twice.

I'm not ashamed of my failure, because in the end, **I learned a lot from quitting**.

Why didn't I stick with it? It was draining me. I wasn't getting the results I wanted. I began pushing out absolute trash that I started writing at 11pm, and I have a commitment to excellence more than a commitment to pure quantity.

I don't regret taking on the challenge or eventually quitting it. I learned a lot about my writing style and what I prefer to write about, I got out of my shell of comfort and published things that usually only reached my [private list](http://rmorabia.com/thoughts),and it eventually led to the [redesign of rmorabia.com](http://rmorabia.com).

Quitting prematurely because things are hard is definitely bad. Worse, though, is sticking with something even though you know it isn't turning out to be as great as you expected.

Always question yourself, or you'll suddenly end up at your retirement party and ask yourself, "What have I done with my life?"

# What's the plan for the future?

This past year has been the best of my life. I've grown so much and met so many amazing people. My general health has skyrocketed even as I pushed out more work than I'd ever done in my life.

I'm very, very excited about the future to come. I expect it'll be infinitely better than this past year.

I'm planning to continue learning web development, reading, writing to rmorabia.com, and generally building my infrastructure for success before I move across the country next summer.

I'm opting to skip college and betting on myself to make it in the world, with the eventual goal of getting into activism and becoming the puppetmaster of whatever revolution(s) I choose to be a part of.

It's all very exciting, but also very unknown. The immediate goal is making a full-time income to sustain myself, without the need to stay in one place and check into an office every day. [Got any tips?](mailto:hi@rmorabia.com)

# Want to get me a birthday present?

The greatest gift you can give me is the opportunity to invest in myself. Gift me a book that changed your life, or [choose something from my to-buy list](http://amzn.com/w/V9ZYYLHO3DXP).

At a minimum, [offer me a piece of advice for the uncertain future to come](mailto:hi@rmorabia.com).

Thank you so much for joining me on this journey. I look forward to the years to come.
